<!-- 
- [Background](#background)
 -->


# Background

The transition towards a future low-carbon economy is driven globally by the Paris Agreement [@Paris15], which recognises the need for sustainable development worldwide to counter the threats of climate change. The European Union (EU) is committed to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050 to 80-90 % below 1990 levels [@Energ12]. As the energy industry is responsible for the highest share of anthropogenic GHG emissions, importance is placed on how changes in energy systems can help achieve these GHG emission reduction targets [@Energ12]. 

A number of opportunities exist for the decarbonisation of the energy industry. The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), in their renewable energy roadmap study, has identified renewable energy as having the highest potential in reducing energy-related carbon dioxide (CO~2~) emissions globally, which is closely followed by energy efficiency and electrification with renewable energy [@Globa18]. In a 2018 political agreement, the EU member states agreed upon a target of at least 32 % of the demand being met with renewables by 2030, through national targets of the individual member states [@Renew]. The electricity demand in the transport sector is also expected to increase due to expected petrol and diesel engine bans and subsequently the electrification of road transport [@World17].

The energy system is also transitioning towards a decentralised system with more consumer participation and new forms of flexibilities, including sector coupling, demand-side management (DSM), energy conversion and storage, cross-border interconnection and curtailment. This allows demand patterns to shift to better suit the generation patterns in systems with high penetration of variable renewable energy (VRE) resources, such as solar and wind [@Lund17], [@Towar18]. However, this requires cooperation involving many actors with various responsibilities and dependencies that interact within this energy system, and opens up the opportunity to perform interdisciplinary research work in the area of energy system analysis.

The ENSYSTRA - ENergy SYStems in TRAnsition Innovative Training Network has been established to address the challenges of the energy transition with interdisciplinary collaboration and regional cooperation involving academia, government and industry [@About]. ENSYSTRA is centred on the North Sea region and focusses on performing interdisciplinary modelling work involving technology, economics, social science and humanities, and combining various modelling approaches in different levels and resolutions. ENSYSTRA aims to keep an open science approach, which will allow the resulting models to be subject to full scientific scrutiny.

Energy systems models, which are tools used to project the future energy supply of a country or region [@Herbs12], is the centre of ENSYSTRA. @Fig:system explains the energy systems modelling process using a system analysis approach. This process starts with creating a model of the actual energy system by simplifying and conceptualising the present system. This conceptualised system with all assumptions is then mathematically solved to produce numerical results. These results can then be interpreted and conclusions can be drawn regarding the future energy system. Such conclusions form the evidence-base for decision makers, resulting in policy implications or operational strategies that help achieve these climate targets. 

![The system analysis approach applied on the energy system modelling process, adapted from Krook-Riekkola 2015 [@Krook15].](images/system-analysis.png "The system analysis approach applied on the energy system modelling process, adapted from Krook-Riekkola 2015 [@Krook15]."){#fig:system}

There are 15 early-stage researchers (ESRs) across four work packages (WPs) in ENSYSTRA, as shown in @fig:wp. The research project entitled "Development of a real-time optimisation solution for dispatchable energy supply units" is conducted by ESR 9, who is enrolled as a PhD student at University of Stavanger (UiS) in Norway. This project is within WP 2 (technology prospects and development pathways), which focusses on technological options for the energy transition, mainly in terms of techno-economic performance over time. For this research project, the technology focus is on the digitalisation of the electricity sector. As the electricity system transitions into smart systems, the system will have an increasing amount of sensors and controllers that continuously record measurements of the system [@Lund17]. Advancements in these technologies mean that data that is fast, heterogeneous and high in volume from the electricity system will be generated. Data with these characteristics must be managed and analysed effectively to gain insights on the electricity system, which can then be converted to strategies that optimise the system [@Manag12]. This project will specifically investigate how artificial intelligence can play a role in the transition to a low-carbon electricity system by utilising high resolution data of the system. The next section will investigate this, as well as explain what is meant by "real-time" and "dispatchable" in the context of electricity systems in this project.

![Interactions between the four WPs of the ENSYSTRA project. Source: ENSYSTRA [@About].](images/wp.png "Interactions between the four WPs of the ENSYSTRA project. Source: ENSYSTRA [@About]."){#fig:wp}
