\hypertarget{problem-definition}{%
\section{Problem definition}\label{problem-definition}}

The table below shows the characteristics of the main energy generation
technologies, including their costs. These generation sources have
different variabilities, fuel types, flexibilities, costs and carbon
emissions. According to the EU reference scenario 2016 {[}EnerND{]},
wind and solar energy resources, which are VRE resources, are expected
to generate a total of 35 \% of EU's electricity by 2050, which is a
significant increase (23 \%) from 2015 levels. Conversely, generation
from nuclear and solids, which are not variable and provide base load
generation, are expected to decrease significantly. Unlike conventional
generators, VRE are intermittent as they are dependent on atmospheric
conditions, such as wind speed and cloud cover, and they vary spatially
(i.e., location-dependent) and temporally {[}Josk11{]}. Therefore, VRE
generation cannot be controlled to meet the demand patterns and needs of
the energy system {[}Josk11{]}, which is a challenge to electricity and
energy system operators in general.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}llllllll@{}}
\caption{Characteristics of the main energy generation technologies,
adapted from Erbach 2016 {[}Erba16{]} and Tidball, et al.~2010
{[}Tidb10{]}.}\tabularnewline
\toprule
Type\protect\hyperlink{f1}{{[}f1{]}} & Variable & Fuel type &
Flexibility & Low carbon & CAPEX\protect\hyperlink{f2}{{[}f2{]}} &
OPEX\protect\hyperlink{f2}{{[}f2{]}} &
LCOE\protect\hyperlink{f2}{{[}f2{]}}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endfirsthead
\toprule
Type\protect\hyperlink{f1}{{[}f1{]}} & Variable & Fuel type &
Flexibility & Low carbon & CAPEX\protect\hyperlink{f2}{{[}f2{]}} &
OPEX\protect\hyperlink{f2}{{[}f2{]}} &
LCOE\protect\hyperlink{f2}{{[}f2{]}}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
Coal & no & fossil & medium & no & low & high & very low\tabularnewline
Natural gas & no & fossil & high & no & very low & very high &
low\tabularnewline
Biomass & no & renewable & medium & yes\protect\hyperlink{f3}{{[}f3{]}}
& low & very high & very high\tabularnewline
Nuclear & no & nuclear & low & zero-emission & medium & medium &
medium\tabularnewline
Hydro & no & renewable & very high & zero-emission & & &\tabularnewline
Solar & yes & renewable & very low & zero-emission & very high & very
low & very high\tabularnewline
Wind & yes & renewable & very low & zero-emission & & &\tabularnewline
\emph{Onshore wind} & & & & & high & very low & very low\tabularnewline
\emph{Offshore wind} & & & & & very high & low & high\tabularnewline
Geothermal & no & renewable & high & zero-emission & high & medium &
high\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

{[}f1{]} \emph{Costs for natural gas, biomass, solar and geothermal are
that of advanced combustion turbine, biomass gasification plant,
utility-scale photovoltaic and hydrothermal plant respectively}

{[}f2{]} \emph{CAPEX - capital costs; OPEX - operational expenditure
(includes fuel and fixed O\&M costs); LCOE - levelised cost of
electricity}

{[}f3{]} \emph{regrowth of biomass compensates emissions}
